(hammers pounding in distance)
Carl: I remember my 8th birthday
at the KCC
with that giant cake
and Aunt Evie showing up
on leave, surprising all of us.
I remember Mom.
I remember Codger.
I remember school
and going to the movies
and Friday-night pizza
and cartoons
and Grandma and Grandpa
and church,
those summer barbecues
in the kiddie pool you got me.
Could've used that
at the prison.
(chuckles)
You told me about the walks
we'd take when I was three,
you holding my hand,
around the neighborhood,
all the way to Ross' farm.
I didn't know that
I remembered them, but I do.
'Cause I see the sun
and the corn
and that cow
that walked up to the fence
and looked me in the eye.
And you told me about
all that stuff,
but it isn't just that stuff.
It's how I felt.
Holding your hand,
I felt happy and special.
I felt safe.
I thought growing up
was about getting a job
and maybe a family,
being an adult,
but growing up
is making yourself
and the people you love safe--
as safe as you can,
because things happen.
They happened before.
You were shot
before things went bad.
Kind of felt like things
went bad because you were shot.
I want to make you feel safe,
Dad.
I want you to feel just like
I felt when you held my hand.
Just to feel that way
for five minutes.
I'd give anything
to make you feel that way now.
I wanted to kill Negan.
I wish I did.
Maybe it would've been done.
I don't think it's done now.
You went out there again,
but I don't think
they surrendered.
I don't think
they will surrender.
Maybe they'll get out somehow.
But if they don't...
There are workers in there, Dad.
They're just regular people--
old people,
young people, families.
You don't want them to die,
Dad.
We're so close
to starting everything over,
and we have friends now.
It's that bigger world
Jesus talked about--
the Kingdom, the Hilltop--
there's-- there's got to be
more places,
more people out there,
a chance for everything
to change and keep changing,
people's lives getting better,
the bigger world
getting better and better,
growing food for each other,
protecting each other,
keeping everyone healthy,
everyone giving everyone
the opportunity to have a life--
a real life.
So if they won't end it,
you have to.
You have to give them
a way out.
You have to find peace
with Negan,
find a way forward somehow.
We don't have to forget
what happened,
but you can make it so that
it won't happen again,
that nobody has to live
this way,
that every life
is worth something.
Start everything over.
Show everyone that they can
be safe again without killing,
that it can feel safe again,
that it could go back
to being birthdays
and school and jobs and even
Friday-night pizza somehow.
And walks with a dad
and a three-year-old holding hands.
Make that come back, Dad.
And go on those walks
with Judith.
She'll remember them.
I love you.
Carl.
(sighs)
(bed creaks)
(papers rustling)
(theme music playing)
I came back here
to make amends.
We got things done.
We were good together,
Simon.
As I said, we stood on
the precipice of greatness,
and we tripped.
I let my fondness for you
cloud my vision,
which is a credit to you,
because I'm quite
a pragmatic man.
Yeah, got to trust
your gut, Simon.
Don't throw this away
on a setback.
(scoffs)
"Setback"?
You made me
look like an ass.
My intel wasn't current.
You know, things changed
at Alexandria.
Juice.
Juice and momentum
can change the game.
They had it, and they did it.
Margaret had the Hilltop
by the nuts.
I didn't know it.
And, yes, we paid a price.
But let me make it right
with Negan, hmm?
I'm Negan.
And not in a collective,
"We're all Negan" sense.
I have assumed control
of the Saviors.
Negan is no longer
on the field of play.
You're the man now?
I am.
(glasses clink)
I knew it.
I knew you could do it.
Negan was a big personality,
I get it,
but, uh...
too unconventional.
Pulled his punches.
Exactly.
Whereas you
are the kind of man
people can look at and say,
"Now there is a leader."
Which is why
I can't be seen
going easy on you.
Optics.
See, if the Saviors
are gonna win this thing,
I can't be stepping into
the role with... baggage.
Not "if" you win.
It's "when."
And after that,
you're gonna need someone
at the Hilltop who can produce.
We won't need anyone there
until we re-staff
the entirety of the colony.
We're going
for full turnover there.
Everyone?
Everyone-- civies to sargies.
Listen...
You don't have to worry
about optics now.
- 'Cause you--
- Oh, I know.
I have that juice.
I have that momentum.
I want to keep it.
ETQO, you go.
(glass thuds)
Well, that is just
breathlessly stupid.
Yep.
You think
these Troglodytes here
are gonna advise you
in managing communities,
in resource reallocations?
In politics?
That's right, yeah,
the bare-knuckle gnad mash
of politics?
It is ended,
Gregory.
No!
I've achieved too much!
L-I-I've suffered too much!
I've survived too much
for it to end like this!
I've lashed myself
to the bow,
seen through the storm,
and I have been reborn
as a-a certified shit kicker!
I make things happen!
I've always
made things happen.
And it's not
gonna end with me
wandering off
into the wilderness
with my dick in my hand.
I put things together
when everything fell apart,
and I can do it again.
I will do it again.
You know, who the hell
are you to tell me I'm done?
Yeah, you think
you have the juice?
Well, I am the juice!
- No!
- Whoa!
(breathing heavily)
(groans)
First...
I wasn't gonna
send you away.
I was gonna kill you.
(breathing heavily)
Second...
do you make coffee?
Best in the land.
We'll start with coffee
and see where it goes.
Rachel:
He's still out here.
Didn't see him
when we left.
Maybe he finally
gave up.
Nope. He won't.
Not unless we make him.
We should just kill him.
(walker growling)
I got it.
(growling continues)
(grunts)
Told ya.
Kathy:
Has he eaten?
(breathing heavily)
We made our choice.
He wants to die
in the woods,
hoping we
change our minds.
That's his choice.
Find yourself some water.
Seems like a waste
of good garlic to me.
And everything else.
That sardine mac-and-cheese
recipe I gave you
was a staple
from my college days
when,
as a cash-strapped student,
I had to pad out
the budget-minded goodness
of M-and-powdered-C
with the protein power
of canned sardines...
which provided
a longer-lasting energy source
than pure carbohydrates.
The garlic sauté
alleys what originated
as a purely "oops" dish.
Mmm.
Takes me back.
Start plating it up.
This is all that's on the menu
for the rest of the time
till this order's complete.
(spoon tapping)
(tapping continues)
I'd like to remind everyone
that our lives are not on lock.
Out of personal respect
to the mutual nature with Negan,
but Negan is MIA.
Simon has taken over,
and he has requested
an exponential acceleration
of production.
More shots on the lickety-quick.
Even if we're double-timing it
around the clock
with nary a carey
for workplace safety,
it isn't gonna prevent us
from meeting our quixotic quota
by the proverbial crap-ton.
The best that we can hope for
is that we somehow manage
to squeeze out
the bare minimum
number of rounds necessary
to avoid the consequences
of Simon
finding out how short we are.
(Gabriel coughing)
(coughing continues)
- No.
- (sniffles, coughs)
Put that mask back on now.
The last thing we can afford
is for yours truly
to contract whatever
kind of nasty infected you
with your improper
guthandfing.
My current theory is that
it's either influenza
or cryptococcosis
and therefore airborne.
If it was
of the blood variety,
you would've already
been dead.
But the fact remains
you're packing pathogens
that can sting with a sneeze,
making it imperative
that you maintain your PPE
at all times while your meds
run their course.
Now hold out your hand.
Feel that.
Primers aren't flush.
The finished rounds
pose the deadly risk
of slam-firing as soon as
they're loaded into the chamber.
Given that this imperfection
is readily evident to the touch,
I can only assume
that this oversight
was purely intentional.
No.
I didn't know.
I just wanted to make it
so that the bullets didn't work.
I wasn't trying to hurt anyone.
I don't want
any of my people to die.
If you cannot accept
that we're your people now,
you may as well
cut to the chase
and chew the next bullet
coming off that line.
Is that what you want?
No.
That's not what I want.
I don't want that.
I don't want to help you.
But...
I do fear death.
Maybe all this--
Maybe this is just His way
of showing me
that I haven't changed...
a way of showing me
that I'm still
the same person who locked
my parishioners out so long ago.
I'm still
the same scared animal,
doing what I must to survive
just like you.
Being alive
may be something
we don't have in common
for much longer.
You are hereby suspended
from the line.
Go find an unobtrusive corner
and stow your load
and keep your mitts to yourself.
(crying)
And try not to cry too loud.
I want to go outside and test-fire
some of these rounds
that you didn't compromise
with your chicanery.
(door creaks)
(walkers growling)
(whistles)
Surprised to see me?
Shouldn't be.
(chuckles)
Hell yeah,
I'm surprised.
We found your car,
and Simon thought that--
Give me a hand with this,
will you?
Not gonna lie--
a real punch in the dick
when Rick cornered me
in the basement
with those
decomposing assholes
and you fellas
never showed up.
Simon thought--
I want to know
what you were thinking.
(growling continues)
See, I want to know
if you remember who you are.
This little talk
is just between me and you.
Simon's your number two.
I thought
you wanted him calling it.
I remember who I am.
I'm Negan.
Good.
That's what I like to hear.
Now do me a favor.
Put that smoke out
right there.
See, when the time comes--
and you will know
when it comes--
I want you to remember
this little talk.
what we've done
and what
we can still do together.
(growling continues)
(growling)
I thought they killed you
and that you were gone, like--
like that.
I think it ginned me good,
ginned us all good.
That they did this to you?
That they did this to us?
No.
I wasn't good with it.
I lacked discipline.
And I made it personal.
And that's why I moved things
from infection to extermination
at the Hilltop.
Yes...
things went bad.
Though I think it's possible
we may have found ourselves
in a similar
tactical situation,
regardless of approach.
We don't know that.
So I'll own it.
I just ask that you give me
a pass on this one.
I'll make it up to you.
I promise you that.
(chuckles)
You know, I remember
when I took this place.
(grunts)
When you helped me
take this place.
Wasn't sure I wanted
to keep you on board.
I mean, before me,
before there was
a system in place,
what you did,
killing all those men,
those boys in that settlement
so long ago,
a lot of people
would think
that is some psychotic shit.
Like that is the work
of a demented,
broken,
goddamn ghoul.
Like that's not someone
that you want to work with,
let alone stand next to.
So I figured
I'd keep my eye on you.
And I did.
And everything
seemed to work out
right up until this point.
I'm gonna need you
on your knees.
You gonna make a move,
or is that it?
No move to make.
No.
There isn't.
All is forgiven.
Get your ass up.
We're good.
I won't let you down.
Not you.
I appreciate the hell
out of that.
This is where we start--
the first
of our new staging posts.
See, we do not have to take
the Hilltop.
We just have to make sure
that the farmers can't leave.
We stay nimble. We stay light.
We plink their asses
every time one of them
tries to poke their head out.
Sometimes right in front,
sometimes from a mile away,
but every goddamn time.
From here on out,
it is death by a thousand cuts
to these assholes.
War of attrition.
Attrition?
Piece by piece.
(chuckles)
(sighs)
Tomorrow afternoon,
I am going to take
a 10-head team to this spot.
I am stocking it
with supplies and ammo
that Dr. Smartypants are making.
Everyone else here
is gonna do the same thing,
same time, different spot.
End of day tomorrow,
we will have cache after cache
around that Hilltop
and always be spitting distance
from a reload.
There will be teams
24/7 around that place...
snipin' them,
one by one, day after day,
until we have full...
attrition.
If you feel
this is the correct course,
it's the course we'll tread.
It's an ambitious plan
with testicular heft,
I'll give you that.
Very happy to have you back,
boss man.
Damn good to be back.
All right, everybody,
clear out.
Except for you, Dwight.
Got a few things
we need to kick around.
(door closes)
You have anything
you want to tell me?
I don't think so.
Are you sure?
Yeah.
100 percent.
(chuckles)
Oh, you are smart as hell.
You know that?
I mean, after everything--
after Sherry and the sizzle...
you didn't stew,
you didn't do anything stupid.
You just went about the business
of getting yours.
Nothing shook you.
You kept your eyes
on what could keep you
alive and well.
You keep on
keeping that shit clear.
(sighs)
(door opens)
(grunts)
Hello.
We need to talk.
You need to eat.
So here's some dried fish,
black walnuts, and water.
It's yours if you leave
and promise me
that you'll never come back.
I can't do that.
But thanks.
What that tells me, though,
is you don't want
people to die.
Same as me.
Same reason why we all
need to fight the Saviors.
We're not fighting.
In that case...
how about
I make you an offer?
I'll eat...
if you invite me inside,
and we can all just...
talk.
No.
You're gonna get sick.
Or starve or worse.
No.
I'm gonna
change your mind.
(scoffs)
I'm aware that,
under the circumstances,
I can never expect
to regain your respect.
Or your trust
or your friendship.
And in case
it wasn't readily apparent,
I have no loyalty
to the Saviors.
I'm loyal only
to my continued survival,
a lone wolf, as it were.
And, therefore,
now that I am in your custody,
I will work just as hard for you
as I ever did.
I can't help but suspect
that the reason I'm being taken
alive is, despite...
what completely warranted
bad blood exists between us,
you still harbor
a vestigial nostalgia
for our
erstwhile camaraderie.
And in light of that,
I'm willing
to just shut my grub flap
and give you your space
until you see such a time as
you're ready to break the ice,
one traveling companion--
Shut your mouth
before I cut your tongue out!
All right!
We got to keep going.
They have to be
out looking for him by now.
- Thank you. I--
- Shut up.
- Let's go.
- (grunts)
You helped us,
but you never cared about us.
You're not a "lone wolf,"
you're a parasite.
Well, technically,
that relationship
would better be described
as symbiotic
as opposed to parasitic,
in that there
was mutual benefit involved.
Knowledge for safety.
What the hell
is wrong with you?
How can you talk about
everything we've been through
like it was some kind
of science experiment?
We weren't just your friends,
we were family.
And then you just
turn on us,
like we meant nothing to you.
When I told Negan
I made the bullet,
it was to save your life.
I didn't think.
I just acted on your behalf.
And I fully expected
the crack of the bat
to be the last thing I heard,
but that didn't happen.
And then I thought
they would torture me.
But they didn't.
They gave me
a chance to live.
And I tried to resist.
I tried to rise above
my biological imperative,
but that is not who I am.
I know who you are.
You're the reason they were able
to escape the Sanctuary.
Everything that's happened
since then,
everyone who's died,
that's on you.
Rick's the one who pushed us all
to take the Saviors on.
He's the one
who jumped headlong into
this shit-storm with no waders.
(gasps)
- (breathing heavily)
- You're selfish,
and you're a coward,
and you're a traitor.
You turned you back on
the only friends you ever had.
Shooting you in the head
right here
would actually make the world
a better place.
But we're not gonna kill you,
not because
we give a rat's ass about you.
We just need
what's in there!
We're gonna stick you in
the darkest hole we can find,
and the only time
you'll see the light of day
is when we need you
to teach us how to do something.
So don't worry--
you'll get what you want.
You'll live.
But we're gonna force you
to do something useful
with your pathetic life.
(knock on door)
(Pounding on door)
(scoffs)
Meeting went well.
Status quo
has been re-achieved.
What'd he hold you back for?
You know, a...
pep talk.
Mm.
We need to talk.
A serious talk with the others
who are less than thrilled
with the current management,
who, like you,
engaged in activity
said management
would frown on.
Maybe we don't need to talk.
Maybe we just go back
to how things were.
No.
We've crossed
some thresholds here, Dwight.
We're transformed.
You know
you can't ever go back.
- So this is it?
- You deliver or get shipped.
He hasn't delivered,
and that saddens me.
But the time has come.
Let us gather
our like-minded individuals,
draw strength
from each other...
and do
what we need to do.
Come on.
I gotta sell this to you?
Think about everything
he's done to you,
every little indignity,
everything he's extracted
from you.
Think about it, Dwight!
You know what you have to do.
You have to meet us
in the courtyard after rounds,
and we begin what's next.
I mean, Jesus, right?
Right.
Yes. m'! “W-
Yes.
(door opens, closes)
(walkers growling)
They must've
heard us pull up.
I got it.
Watch him.
(growling continues)
(body thuds)
(crossbow fires, body thuds)
(gags)
Shit.
(grunting)
(gunshots)
He couldn't have got far.
Come on.
We can't let him
get back to them!
If you see him,
blow that pig's head off!
(grunting)
(walkers growling)
(walker growling)
(grunting)
(walkers growling)
(panting)
Oh, God.
(growling continues)
(grunting)
Aah!
(growling continues)
(grunts)
(branch thudding)
(panting)
Rachel:
Is he dead?
(thunder rumbles)
You...
You blamed Enid...
for Natania's death.
But it's really the Saviors.
What they did to you,
what they turned you into...
it's their fault.
You hide.
You don't trust.
You don't live the life the way
you want to because of them.
They hurt you,
and they're gonna
keep on hurting you.
Unless you do one thing!
Fight.
(walkers growling)
(door opens)
H9)!-
Some shit, huh?
Yeah.
Got to think, uh...
you wanted this
before we did.
(growling continues)
If you're here right now,
you're in.
We can talk about approaches
and finesses, but you are in.
No takebacks.
We need to make this quick,
quiet, and respectful.
Man's done a lot for us.
He deserves that.
(growling continues)
We had a lot of good times.
A lot of hills taken.
But this all happened
because he didn't know
when to cut bait.
But we did.
We do.
(growling continues)
You...
have some legitimate
personal issues with the man.
The kill is yours
if you want it.
Something quiet.
I mean, not a knife.
(chuckles)
Can't make it that personal.
A silencer.
We call a meeting.
And that's it.
The next order of business
is to set the break,
to start the healing.
The catalyzing event
to facilitate that
is the destruction of
the Hilltop and its residents.
We'll make it
a monument of compliance.
Sorry, Gregvfy-
And then...
we get on with our lives.
Right, Dwight?
(growling continues)
(Negan whistles)
(whistling continues)
(sighs)
Thank you, D.
I'll take it from here.
Three...
two...
one.
(silenced gunshots)
Dwight!
(groans)
Now there is the Simon
that I know.
He comes right at you instead
of that backstabby bullshit.
Why?
After everything
he did to you, huh?
Why do this?
He'd win.
You killed
all the garbage people, Simon.
(Lucille thuds)
(grunts)
After I specifically told you
not to do that shit.
(grunts, Lucille thuds)
I got a sneakin' suspicion
that you were hopin' I was dead...
(grunts, Lucille thuds)
when Rick kamikazed
that convoy.
(sighs)
And the Hilltop?
Yeah.
(grunts, Lucille thuds)
All is not forgiven.
But...
after all this,
and me being me...
I'm still gonna give you
your shot.
You want to be the man,
you got to beat the man.
If you can do that...
then,heH...
you should be the man.
Simon: Everyone!
After this is done,
we get to work.
Just know
that I didn't want this.
But the Sanctuary must stand.
This is not the man
to prosecute this conflict.
Just wanted to say...
a grateful enclave--
unh!-- thanks you!
(grunts)
(both grunting)
(punches landing)
(groans)
(both grunting)
You need
to get out of here now.
No shit.
Give this to Rick
and tell him
about tomorrow.
It's the only move
you got.
I left a car for you
behind the coal chutes.
Go.
You went for it all
at the Hilltop.
You got Saviors killed,
and then you ran away
like a coward!
You got shown up
one too many times.
Those people,
they are always gonna know
that there's a loophole,
a way to skate.
They are always gonna be looking
for that chance to push back,
so now
I gotta kill all of 'em
just like
I'm gonna kill you!
(choking)
(windpipe cracks)
(grunts)
(panting)
What an asshole.
(chains rattling, lock clicks)
What're we gonna do?
Such a damn shame--
a waste--
slinking behind my back
like some kind of dickless worm.
Planning on killing me...
Like,
what else am I gonna do
besides crush the guy's throat?
Yeah.
Eh, you know,
what's bad for Simon,
it's good for you.
And I know we've had
our ups and downs, D,
but I've always been able
to count on you.
So...
congratulations.
You are
my new right-hand man.
That is,
if you accept the promotion.
I do.
And I'll help you
finish this thing with Rick.
Don't sell yourself short,
D.
You already have.
Well, you look surprised,
Dwight.
Yeah, see, I found her
on the side of the road.
Laura, why don't you tell D
what you told me?
That night in Alexandria,
he turned on us.
He killed our team.
I ran,
and I kept on running.
I was hurt.
But what kept me alive
was the thought
of getting back here
and exposing you
for the scum weasel you are.
(chuckles)
It all makes sense now.
You told Rick when to attack.
How to get
to the outposts...
You keep us locked in here,
slipping them workers guns.
Maybe you even lied to me
about killing Sherry.
Oh, hell.
You, for sure,
lied to me about that.
So, what? Hmm?
You think you're some sort
of a (inhales sharply) hero?
No.
You are nothing.
A nobody
in way over your head.
But when I said
that you would come through
for me when I needed it,
oh, I meant that 110%.
See, I knew
that I could count on you
to deliver my plan
to Rick,
my brilliant,
if I do say so myself,
fake-ass plan.
(sighs)
You used Gregory
for that, right?
I mean, I was thinking
maybe you'd take some kind of
field trip or something, but...
no, you got yourself
a little delivery boy.
Good for you.
To deliver
all that intel to Rick
and the piss patrol
that's gonna lead them
directly into the line of fire.
They are not gonna know
what hit 'em,
aHthanks
to my new right-hand man.
(lips squeak)
Now, see, I-- I thought about
killing you, and then...
(inhales sharply)
I thought maybe that'd be
too dignified for a...
backstabbing, double-crossing
dirtbag such as yourself.
No, Dwighty boy,
I got plans for you.
(chuckles)
(tools clanging)
What the hell happened?
We need preparations
to defend this place
in case
of another incursion.
We've established
a perimeter.
We just got a message
from the Sanctuary.
Negan's back,
and he has plans
to finish the Hilltop.
Rick's walking into a trap.
We'll need that bullet order
filled by tomorrow morning.
Kindly convey to Negan
my personal congratulations
on the occasion of his return,
and assure him
that his request
will be fulfilled
in its entirety and on time.
That's right.
If Negan needs bullets
to end this war,
then, by ginger,
he's gonna get 'em.
All of 'em.
Scotch my talk
of a bare minimum.
No, sirs and madams,
we shall rise to the occasion
with the ammunition.
We will blow them away with
every trigger pull they require.
We shall, we will.
Oh, trip not, colleagues.
We will change
Savior history evermore.
Gabriel.
It's all hands
on deck,
and yours
are sorting shells.
Listen, you follow my lead
to the letter on the lead,
or you can cry and die.
(fist pounds)
Here we go.
Time to do something useful
with our pathetic lives.
(Simon growling)
(walkie-talkie clicks)
Michonne:
Negan, it's Michonne.
(walkie-talkie clicks)
I'll wait.
The one with the dreads, the sword?
Is that you?
Rick there with you?
Why don't you put him on?
(walkie-talkie clicks)
This isn't about Rick.
It's about Carl.
(walkers growling)
He wrote you a letter.
And I'm delivering it
because that's what he wanted.
(walkie-talkie clicks)
Well, I can't promise
not to kill the messenger.
(walkie-talkie clicks)
Just shut up and listen.
"Negan, this is Carl."
"I was helping someone.
I got bit.
We didn't even have to be doing
what we were doing.
I was just helping someone,
and now I'm gone.
You might be gone.
Maybe my Dad made your people
give you up and he killed you,
but I don't think so.
I think you're still around
and you're working on a way out.
Maybe you got out.
Maybe you think
we're a lost cause
and you just want
to kill all of us.
I think you think
you have to be who you are.
I just wonder
if this is what you wanted.
I wanted to ask you.
I wish I could've.
Maybe you'll beat us.
And if you do, there'll just be
someone else to fight.
The way out is working together.
It's forgiveness."
"It's believing that it doesn't
have to be a fight anymore.
Because it doesn't."
"I hope my dad offers you peace.
I hope you take it.
I hope everything can change.
It did for me.
Start over.
You still can.
Carl."
(walkie-talkie clicks)
All this...
there is no
getting out of it now.
I wouldn't
accept your surrender
if you came to me
on your knees.
See, winning isn't about
beating you.
Winning is about killing
every last one of you.
That is starting over.
I never wanted this.
Rick made this happen.
You tell him that.
No more talk.
(walkie-talkie clicks)
(theme music playing)